

===== PAGE 1 =====
1304 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONTROL OF NETWORK SYSTEMS, VOL. 8, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2021
Searching for Critical Power System Cascading
Failures With Graph Convolutional Network
Y uxiao Liu , Student Member, IEEE , Ning Zhang , Senior Member, IEEE ,D a nW u , Member, IEEE ,
Audun Botterud, Member, IEEE , Rui Y ao , Senior Member, IEEE , and Chongqing Kang , Fellow, IEEE
Abstract—Power system cascading failures become
more time variant and complex because of the increas-
ing network interconnection and higher renewable energy
penetration. High computational cost is the main obsta-
cle for a more frequent online cascading failure search,
which is essential to improve system security. We propose
a more efﬁcient search framework with the aid of a graph
convolutional network (GCN) to identify as many critical
cascading failures as possible with limited attempts. The
complex mechanism of cascading failures can be well cap-
tured by training a GCN ofﬂine. Subsequently, the search
for critical cascading failures can be signiﬁcantly accel-
erated with the aid of the trained GCN model. We further
enable the interpretability of the GCN model by a layerwise
relevance propagation algorithm. The proposed method is
tested on both the IEEE RTS-79 test system and China’s
Henan Province power system. The results show that the
GCN-guided method can not only accelerate the search of
critical cascading failures, but also reveal the reasons for
predicting the potential cascading failures.
Index Terms —Cascading failures, graph convolutional
network (GCN), learning, power systems, security assess-
ment.
I. I NTRODUCTION
I
N INTERCONNECTED power systems, some local failures
can yield subsequent failures which may eventually lead to
severe damage to the system. This sequence of failures is referred
to as the “cascading failure.” Searching for the critical cascading
failure paths (the ordered failure of a sequence of components)
Manuscript received May 12, 2020; revised May 13, 2020 and Novem-
ber 9, 2020; accepted February 9, 2021. Date of publication March 3,
2021; date of current version September 17, 2021. The work of Y uxiao
Liu, Ning Zhang, and Chongqing Kang is supported in part by the
National Science Foundation of China under Grant U1766212, and in
part by the Tsinghua University Initiative Scientiﬁc Research Program
under Grant 20193080026. The work of Rui Y ao is supported by DOE
Ofﬁce of Science under Grant DE-AC02-06CH11357. Recommended
by Associate Editor P . Cheng. (Corresponding author: Ning Zhang.)
Y uxiao Liu, Ning Zhang, and Chongqing Kang are with the
Department of Electrical Engineering, Tsinghua University , Beijing
100084, China, and are also with the International Joint Labora-
tory on Low Carbon Clean Energy Innovation, Tsinghua Univer-
sity , Beijing 100084, China (e-mail: liuyuxiao16@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn;
ningzhang@tsinghua.edu.cn; cqkang@tsinghua.edu.cn).
Dan Wu and Audun Botterud are with the Laboratory of Information
and Decision Systems, Massachusetts Institute of T echnology , Cam-
bridge, MA 02139 USA (e-mail: danwumit@mit.edu; audunb@mit.edu).
Rui Y ao is with Energy Systems, Argonne National Laboratory ,
Lemont, IL 60439 USA (e-mail: yaorui.thu@gmail.com).
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TCNS.2021.3063333
is of great importance for securing the operation conditions.
Once some critical cascading failure paths are detected, various
preventive strategies can be applied, such as redispatching the
generators to decrease the power-ﬂow of high risk branches,
strengthening the transmission lines inspection, increasing the
generation reserves, etc. [1], [2]. With the increasing intercon-
nection of power networks and the penetration of stochastic
renewable generation, cascading failure paths become more
time variant and complex [3], [4]. Therefore, the cascading
failure search calls for a more frequent online calculation to
safeguard reliable operation of the power system. However,
the high computational cost, from the “curse of combinatorial
dimensionality” of the contingencies, is the major obstacle to-
ward an online cascading failure search. For a power system
with N components, the number of N −k contingencies is
N !/(N −k)!, if the sequence matters [1].
Efforts have been made regarding the efﬁcient analysis of
cascading failures. One approach is to modify the random
sampling strategies of components’ failures so that more severe
paths could be detected within fewer samples. Such techniques
include the importance sampling method [5], [6]; the splitting
method [7], [8]; the random chemistry method [9]; etc. Although
these methods can signiﬁcantly improve the sampling efﬁciency
compared to random sampling, they still suffer from duplicated
simulations of the same cascading paths. To avoid duplicated
simulations, some methods model the cascading failures simu-
lation as a Markov chain search problem. Y aoet al.[10] proposed
the risk estimation index to quantify the priority of each search
attempt. Liu et al. [11] accelerated the cascading failure sim-
ulation by simplifying multiple related dc optimal power-ﬂow
(OPF) problems into afﬁne calculation problems. Nonetheless,
the Markov chain search still suffers from high computational
complexity from the large search space of network cascading
failures. The authors in [12] and [13] analytically computed the
disturbance value (or the redistribution of power-ﬂow) caused
by a failure to replace the power-ﬂow calculation. Similarly,
some analytical vulnerability indexes based on centrality [14]
and complex network theory [15] were also proposed. Such
analytical indexes provide an efﬁcient way for vulnerability
analysis, but they cannot well capture the islanding or redispatch
events in the whole cascading failure procedure. Some other
approaches used statistical methods to explore the interactions
among the components in the power systems, such as the in-
ﬂuence graph model [16], [17] and the interaction model [18],
[19]. Although such methods can extract some key rules from
2325-5870 © 2021 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Xian Jiaotong University. Downloaded on May 08,2026 at 08:58:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 2 =====
LIU et al.: SEARCHING FOR CRITICAL POWER SYSTEM CASCADING FAILURES 1305
the simulation data, the statistical models are still too simple
to accurately represent the power system cascading failures.
For example, under different operation conditions (e.g., load
patterns and branch ﬂow patterns), the interactions among the
same components are different. However, the above statistical
models cannot capture such difference. Because of the complex
mechanism of cascading failures, it still remains a challenging
problem to effectively search for the cascading failure paths that
result in load shedding.
Recently, some machine learning models are proposed to cap-
ture the complex mechanism of cascading failures. The models
learn the mapping from simulated power system operational
data to the vulnerability of the components, thereby acceler-
ating the an online cascading failure search. Several different
machine learning models have been investigated recently, such
as the deep neural network (DNN) [20], the convolutional neural
network (CNN) [21], [22]; the decorrelated neural network
ensembles [23]; and the Q-learning model [24], [25]. Some of
the aforementioned methods train the machine learning model
to directly predict whether the systems are stable or not under
certain contingencies [16], [20], [21], [23]; while others only use
the machine learning model to guide the search with the physical
models (e.g., the power-ﬂow-based model) [24], [25]. Two vital
problems remain to be addressed to build better machine learning
models. One challenge is that the number of model parameters
increases signiﬁcantly with the size of the power system, making
the training process time-consuming and prone to overﬁtting.
Another challenge is the lack of interpretability of machine
learning models that hinders the practical applications in power
systems [26]. It is necessary for the power system operators to
check the logic of the models and to understand the underlying
factors that cause cascading failures.
To address the aforementioned problems, we propose a graph
convolutional network (GCN) [27], [28]-based approach for an
efﬁcient online search of critical cascading failures. The GCN
model takes advantage of the fact that the mechanism of cascad-
ing failures is highly related to the topology of the power system,
e.g., the failure of a branch will more likely result in the load
shedding of the nearby buses, or the increase of a bus load will
more likely trigger the protection relays of the nearby branches,
etc. The proposed GCN approach uses a graphical model to learn
this mechanism and theoretically requires far fewer parameters
than other machine learning models (DNN or CNN) [20], [22].
To increase the interpretability of the model, we tailor the model
inputs into four types of factors: 1) the topology of the network;
2) the impact of the protection relays; 3) the branch ﬂow; and
4) the amount of load consumption. Furthermore, we explain
the GCN model by a layerwise relevance propagation (LRP)
algorithm [29] and quantify the contribution factors of model
predictions. To the best of the authors’ knowledge, this article
is the ﬁrst to implement the interpretability of GCN models in
power grid analysis. The proposed algorithms can identify the
contributing factors that cause the cascading failures, and these
results could help manage the power system to mitigate the dam-
age. Further, the proposed method can identify the components
failures of both the initial failures and the cascade failures. All
of the failures are in an ordered sequence, which is different
Fig. 1. Framework of power system cascading failure search over
different states S.
from some previous works that identify some simultaneous
failures [6], [9], [10], [30]. The contributions of this work are as
follows.
1) We propose a GCN-based search framework to identify as
many critical cascading failures as possible with limited
attempts, which enables an efﬁcient online deployment to
better protect the power system.
2) The proposed GCN model links the power network topol-
ogy with the structure of neural networks and can learn
the complex power system cascading failure mechanism
within a smaller model parameter space.
3) We implement the LRP algorithm to enable the inter-
pretability of the GCN model so as to narrow down the
contributing factors to the cascading failures.
The remainder of this article is organized as follows. Section II
introduces the power system cascading failure simulation and
search strategy used in this work. In Section III, we propose the
GCN model and its interpretation method for the cascading fail-
ure search. Thereafter, the case study is presented in Section IV.
Finally, Section V draws the conclusions.
II. P OWER SYSTEM CASCADING FAILURE SEARCH
A. Framework of Cascading Failure Search
The framework of power system cascading failure search is
shown in Fig. 1. The purpose of this work is to ﬁgure out more
cascading paths that result in load shedding in a certain number
of online search attempts. First, we generate the power system
cascading failure path ofﬂine as training samples. We then train
a GCN model that maps from the current operational state to
the vulnerabilities of each component. We combine the trained
GCN model and selected physical rules as the guidance in the
online cascading failure search, where the components with high
vulnerabilities are searched with priorities. The interpretable
results of why certain components are predicted with high
vulnerabilities are also provided by the method.
B. Power System Cascading Failures Simulation
In this work, we simulate the power system cascading fail-
ures based on the ORNL-PSerc-Alaska (OPA) [31]–[33] model,
Authorized licensed use limited to: Xian Jiaotong University. Downloaded on May 08,2026 at 08:58:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 3 =====
1306 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONTROL OF NETWORK SYSTEMS, VOL. 8, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2021
which is widely adopted and developed in [7], [10], [11], [25],
[34]. The OPA model simulates the cascading failures triggered
by branch failures in the power system. Two types of failures
are considered. One type is caused by random events such as
sagging and tree contact. The other type is triggered by the action
of protection relays once the branch ﬂow exceeds the preset
threshold. In this work, we simulate a limited number of random
failures (the ﬁrst type), while we simulate all of the protection
relay actions once they happen. The OPA model applied in this
work can be summarized as follows.
1) Step 1: Set a positive integer value R, so that we only
consider the cases of no more than R random failures.
Run the OPF.1 given the initial load proﬁle.
2) Step 2: If the number of random branch failures is less
than the preset value R, randomly disconnect a branch as
the initial failure. Else, end the simulation.
3) Step 3: Run the power-ﬂow. Disconnect the branch that
triggers the protection relays and run Step 3 again. If the
network separates into islands, conduct load shedding for
the islands which have a lack of generation.
4) Step 4: Redispatch the system with the objective to mini-
mize the total load shedding and with the constraints of the
system security rules (e.g., the branch ﬂow constraints).
Run Step 2.
Note that the OPA model is implemented as an indicative test
bed, which is not the main focus of this work. The proposed OPA
model is different from the original one [31]. The original OPA
model randomly disconnects the overloaded branches, while our
model disconnects the lines that exceed a threshold and trigger
the protection relays. We use a deterministic way to disconnect
the branches according to the method in [34], which models the
action of protection relays.
C. Branch Vulnerabilities to Guide the Search
When simulating the cascading failures, the major computa-
tional burden comes from the combinatorial explosion in Step
2, i.e., we have to disconnect every branch that may fail and
simulate every possible case. To ease the computational burden,
we train a model that guides the search in Step 2 . That is, we
provide a priority on the search order at Step 2, given the current
operational state. To this end, we organize the data into input
XGCN and output yGCN to train the GCN model
yGCN = f (XGCN). (1)
The input XGCN is the current operational state (e.g. the load,
the branch ﬂow, the current branch failures, etc.,) and the output
yGCN is a Boolean vector that quantiﬁes the vulnerability of the
branches. The kth variable of the vector yGCN
k is a binary value
representing whether the load shedding occurs after disconnect-
ing branch k (0-without load shedding, 1-load shedding).
Afterwards, we adopt some physical rules to assist the GCN
model. We calculate the value of line outage distribution factors
1Note that we use the dc power-ﬂow in accordance with [32], [33]. There is
no limitation to extend this framework to ac power-ﬂow.
(LODF) [35], [36]. For a system with N buses, we have
Dk
m = Xk
m/xm
1−Xk
k/xk
,X k
m = MT
mXMk (2)
where Dk
m denotes the additional branch ﬂow in branch m (as
a fraction of the initial branch ﬂow in branch k) after the outage
of branch k, xk is the branch reactance of branch k, X is the
N ×N nodal reactance matrix, Xk
m is the (m,k) variable in the
X matrix, and Mk is a N × 1 vector for branch k from bus i to
busj
Mk =
[
0
1
... 1
i
... -1
j
... 0
N
] T
. (3)
After the outage of branch k, the vulnerability of branch k can
be quantiﬁed by the total branch ﬂow in branch m as a fraction
of its long term maximum branch ﬂow Lmax
m
αk
m = |Lm +Dk
mLk|/Lmax
m (4)
where Lm/Lk denotes the branch ﬂow of branch m and
branch k, respectively. When αk
m exceeds the protection relay
threshold β, the protection relay will disconnect the branch m.
When the system separates into islands, the denominator of (2)
(1−Xk
k/xk) is 0. In this case, we set αk
m to another value to
avoid a numerical problem. We set αk
m = βbecause βalready
reaches the threshold to trigger the protection relays after the
power-ﬂow redistribution, which is large enough to represent
the vulnerability of branch k
ˆαk
m =
{
αk
m 1−Xk
k/xk ̸=0
β 1−Xk
k/xk =0 . (5)
Then, we deﬁne the vulnerability vector based on physical rules
as yP , with the kth variable as
yP
k =m a x
m
ˆαk
m. (6)
Equations (5) and (6) denote that the protection relay (of branch
m with the largest ˆαk
m) will take action or the system will
separate once yP
k exceeds β. Larger yP
k intuitively implies that
the failure of branchk maybe more likely to incur load shedding.
Hence, yP
k serves as a fast yet not accurate factor to quantify
the branch vulnerabilities. Finally, we guide the online search
of cascading failures by both the vulnerabilities learned by the
GCN yGCN and the vulnerabilities from physical rules yP .
D. Online Search Algorithm
The online search model only differs from the OPA model
in the term of the order to disconnect the branches in Step 2 ,
so that we can detect the cascading failures that result in load
shedding more efﬁciently. That is, we calculate theyGCN and yP
before running Step 2. Every time we run Step 2, we ﬁrst discon-
nect the branch that yGCN
k =1 , then we disconnect the branch
from the largest yP
k to the smallest yP
k . The above approach
is a hybrid search method of machine learning and physical
rules, which shows promising performance in case studies. The
aforementioned process is formulated in Algorithm 1. Note that
Algorithm 1 can detect both the initial failures than can the
cascades. The initial failures are detected by the value of yGCN
Authorized licensed use limited to: Xian Jiaotong University. Downloaded on May 08,2026 at 08:58:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 4 =====
LIU et al.: SEARCHING FOR CRITICAL POWER SYSTEM CASCADING FAILURES 1307
Algorithm 1: The Online Search Algorithm.
1: Step 1*: Run the DCOPF given the initial load proﬁle;
2: Step 2*: Use the GCN and physical rules to guide the
search;
3: while the number of random branch failures is less
than a preset value R, do
4: calculate yGCN with (1);
5: for all yGCN
k =1 , do
6: disconnect the branch k and run the Step 3 and
Step 4 of the OPA model in Section II-B; run
Step 2* to simulate the next failure;
7: end for
8: calculate yP with (2)–(6);
9: for all yP
k from the largest to the smallest, do
10: disconnect the branch k and run the Step 3 and
Step 4 of the OPA model in Section II-B; run
Step 2* to simulate the next failure;
11: end for
12: end while
13: Step 3*: Output all the cascading paths that cause load
shedding.
and yP . The cascades are detected by running the power-ﬂow
and disconnecting the branch that triggers the protection relays
(the Step 3 in Section II-B). The search algorithm can not only
obtain the cascading paths that cause load shedding, but also
output the load shedding location and amount.
III. G RAPH CONVOLUTIONAL NETWORK
A. Learning on Graphs
We focus on how to build the model that maps from the
current operational state to the vulnerability of the branches,
as formulated in (1). The operational data of the power system
are physically represented and correlated in the form of graphs.
The mechanism of cascading failures is also closely related to
the graphical structure of the system. Therefore, we choose the
GCN model over the DNN model [20] and the CNN model [22]
because it is designed to capture such graph structured mecha-
nisms. The basic layers of the DNN model, the CNN model, and
the GCN model are shown in Fig. 2. The above layers consist of
a group of nodes. The nodes in the next layer take the weighted
summation of the nodes in the previous layer. The layers mainly
differ in the way that they take the weighted summation among
different range of nodes in the previous layer. The layers in DNN,
CNN, and GCN take the weighted summation of all the nodes,
the neighboring nodes in Euclidean domain, and the neighbor-
ing nodes in graph domain, respectively. Beneﬁting from the
structure of the graph convolutional layer, the GCN model can
better capture the dependence and relationships represented by
graphs.
B. Design of GCN Structure
For clarity, we use “bus” and “branch” to represent the power
network, while we use “node” and “edge” to represent the graph
in GCN. The traditional GCN models make classiﬁcation or
Fig. 2. Demonstration of three types of layers. (a) Fully connected
layer in DNN model. (b) Convolutional layer in CNN model. (c) Graph
convolutional layer in GCN model.
Fig. 3. Illustration of the network-graph mapping, where branches in
the power network are transformed to nodes in the graph.
regression on nodes, but we search for the vulnerable branches
in our framework. Hence, we conduct a network-graph mapping
as demonstrated in Fig. 3, where the data organized in branches
are transformed to the data organized in nodes. The two nodes
in the graph domain are connected when the two branches in
the power network domain have common buses. For a power
network with L branches, the graph domain has L nodes. The
input of the GCN model can be formulated as
XGCN =[ x1 ... xc ... xC ] (7)
whereC is the number of input features, andxc is aL× 1 vector.
The GCN model to guide the cascading failure search is
depicted in Fig. 4, which maps fromXGCN to yGCN. It consists of
two graph convolutional layers and a fully connected layer with
softmax output. The graph convolutional layer [28] takes the
weighted average of the neighboring nodes in the graph domain
and output a certain number of L× 1 vectors (e.g., F vectors).
The f th output vector is given by
ygraph
f =
C∑
c=1
Gcf xc +bf 1 (8a)
Gcf =
KGCN∑
k=0
wcf kA
k
(8b)
wherewcf k is the learnable weight parameter,bf is the learnable
constant parameter, 1 is the all-ones L× 1 vector, Gcf is the
L×L graph ﬁlter, A = D−1/2AD−1/2 is the normalization
of the graph adjacency matrix A, and D is the diagonal degree
matrix of the graph withDii = ∑
j Aij . Equation (8a) indicates
that the output of the graph convolutional layer is the summation
of inputs over graph ﬁlters. Equation (8b) indicates that the graph
ﬁlter Gcf can extract the relationship within K hops (or K
neighborhood) in a graph.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Xian Jiaotong University. Downloaded on May 08,2026 at 08:58:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 5 =====
1308 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONTROL OF NETWORK SYSTEMS, VOL. 8, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2021
Fig. 4. Structure of the proposed GCN model.
The rectiﬁed linear unit (Relu) layer serves as the activation
function that adds nonlinearity to the neural network. It will
output the positive part of the inputs
yRelu =m a x ( 0, xRelu) (9)
where xRelu and yRelu are the input and output vectors of the
Relu layer, respectively.
The output dimension through the graph convolutional layer
and the Relu layer is L×F . In one single node, the output can
be transformed as aF × 1 vector. We add a fully connected layer
yfully = Wxfully +b (10)
where xfully and yfully are the input and output vectors of the
fully connected layer, W is the learnable weights parameters,
andb is the learnable constant parameter. In (10),yfully is aL× 2
vector that consists of the variables representing the conditions
for each node k: yfully
k1 for normal condition and yfully
k2 for load
shedding. The classiﬁcation result is either a normal condition
or load shedding with a larger value of yfully
ki .
We then introduce the softmax function to provide the prob-
ability of the ﬁnal classiﬁcation result
ysoft
ki = eyfully
ki
eyfully
k1 +eyfully
k2
,i =1 , 2. (11)
The classiﬁcation error is set as the negative log-likelihood
(NLL)
Lnll
k = −w1yGCN
k logysoft
k1 −w2(1−yGCN
k )l o gysoft
k2 (12)
where Lnll
k is the NLL of the kth output, yGCN
k is the ground
truth output as introduced in (1), andw1 andw2 are the weights to
different classes. As the output has less value-1 (load shedding)
than value-0 (without load shedding), we assign w1 >w 2 to
learn from the biased sample.
C. Parameter Space of GCN
We analyze the parameter space required to learn the cas-
cading failure mechanism by comparing the basic layers of
T ABLE I
PARAMETER SPAC E O FTHREE TYPES OF LA YERS
the DNN model, the CNN model, and the GCN model again.
The comparison of the parameter space of the fully connected
layer in the DNN model, the convolutional layer in the CNN
model, and the graph convolutional layer in the GCN model are
shown in Table I. We assume the number of neurons of the fully
connected layer is NDNN, the kernel size of the convolutional
layer is KCNN ×KCNN , and the number of hops of the graph
convolutional layer is KGCN. See [20] and [22] for modeling
details of the DNN and the CNN, respectively.
In Table I, NDNN is proportional to the number of buses in a
power system. KCNN and KGCN denote how many neighboring
nodes to extract the feature from, which is far fewer than the
number ofNDNN. The neighboring nodes in convolutional layers
may not be the neighboring buses in the power network, thus
NCNN should be larger than NGCN to extract the feature of
neighboring buses. For the power system of Henan province
that has 730 buses and 1571 branches, the N 2
DNN is more than
3× 107,t h eN 2
CNN is 64, and the NGCN is only 3. The case of
Henan province will be introduced in detail in Section IV -B. To
summarize, regarding the cascading failure learning problem,
the graph convolutional layer has the smallest feature space that
is efﬁcient to train.
D. Interpretability of the Model
To increase the interpretability of the proposed GCN model,
we ﬁrst tailor the input of our model into four parts with physical
interpretations, and then we calculate the contribution factors of
the inputs by an LRP algorithm.
In detail, the input of the model is a L× 4 matrix
XGCN =
[
xt xp xb xl]
. (13)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Xian Jiaotong University. Downloaded on May 08,2026 at 08:58:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 6 =====
LIU et al.: SEARCHING FOR CRITICAL POWER SYSTEM CASCADING FAILURES 1309
In (13), xt is a Boolean vector that represents the effects of
current system topology (or the initial failures) on the cascading
failures, with 0 for the operational state and 1 for outage of a
branch; xp is a vector that represents the effects of protection
relays, the value is the ratio of absolute branch ﬂow to the protec-
tion relay threshold branch ﬂow (thekth value isLk/βLmax
k ); xb
is the absolute branch ﬂow vector; and xl represents the larger
load value between the two buses that the branch is connected
to. So far, we have organized our inputs into four aspects: 1)
topology; 2) protection relay; 3) branch ﬂow; and 4) the bus
load. To quantify the contribution factors of these four inputs, we
implement the LRP algorithm that was proposed to explain the
CNN model [37]. The LRP decomposes the output value into a
combination of the model inputs. The decomposed values, a.k.a.
the relevance scores, quantify the contribution of the inputs to
the output. The process transforms the relevance scores of the
next layerRd+1
i to the relevance scores of the previous layerRd
i ,
such that the sum of each relevance scores of each layer equals
the output value
y = ··· =
∑
i∈layerd+1
Rd+1
i =
∑
i∈layerd
Rd
i = ··· =
∑
i∈layer1
R1
i. (14)
We decompose the relevance scores of the next layer by the
weights of the positive inputsz+
ij from all the connected neurons
of the previous layer
Rd
i =
∑
j∈i
z+
ij∑
i′∈j z+
i′ j
Rd+1
j (15)
where ∑
j∈i sums over the neurons in layer d +1 that are
connected to neuron i, ∑
i′∈j sums over the neurons in layer
d that is connected with neuron j, and z+
ij =m a x (xiwij, 0) is
the positive part of the input from neuron i to neuron j.W e
decompose the relevance scores by the weight of positive parts
to compute the excitatory effects on the output of each layer.
Recall that the Relu activation function only outputs the positive
parts of the input, so that only positive input can contribute to a
larger output (or have excitatory effects) of the Relu activation
function. We only compute the excitatory effects to focus on the
factors that incur the load shedding. In this work, we calculate
the relevance scores corresponding to the output that determines
the prediction of load shedding. For example, we calculate the
factors that incur the load shedding after the failure of branch k.
In this case, according to the proposed GCN model, we decom-
pose the output corresponding to the load shedding prediction,
which is yfully
k1 . That is, the y in (14) is yfully
k1 in (10).
IV . CASE STUDIES
A. IEEE RTS-79 T est System
The IEEE RTS-79 test system contains 24 buses and
38 branches with a peak load of 2850 MW and a total genera-
tion capacity of 3405 MW [38]. Eight-thousand scenarios [the
XGCN ∼yGCN pair described in (1)] are generated as the train-
ing dataset, to consider the cases of different load proﬁles and
different initial contingencies. To model the load uncertainty,
we multiply a random factor drawn uniformly over the interval
[0.9, 1.1] to the load of every bus. To simulate a more severe
result, the actual load of each scenario from [38] is enlarged by
a factor of 1.1. In this work, we consider N-2 contingencies as
the random initial failures. The simulation of cascading failures
is carried out using MA TLAB 2018b, Cplex 12.9 [39], and
Matpower 6.0 [40] on a standard PC with an Intel ⃝R CoreTM
i7-8550 U CPU running at 1.80 GHz and 32.0 GB of RAM.
The proposed GCN model is implemented by Pytorch 1.3 [41].
The hyper-parameters of the GCN model are tuned by ﬁve-fold
cross-validation [42], where we tune the hyperparameters by
grid search and choosing the hyper-parameters with the best
performance on the cross-validation set. The hyperparameters
of the GCN model are tuned by 20% of the training data.
We set the number of hops KGCN =3 , the ratio of training
weight w1/w2 =2 0, and the number of the output vectors of
the ﬁrst and the second graph convolutional layer as F1 =1 6
andF2 =4 , respectively.
We use the Adam optimizer [43] to train the proposed GCN
model, which is implemented by Pytorch 1.3 [41]. One the one
hand, the Adam optimizer uses the moving average of gradient
to prevent oscillations during iterations. On the other hand, it
rescales the gradient so that the gradient of each variables are
normalize to one or minus one. We refer to [43] for more details
on Adam optimizer. The model is trained using 20 epochs and
a batch size of 32 with the learning rate of 0.005.
We implement a set of newly generated load proﬁles to test
different cascading failure online search methods. Each com-
pared method only differs from the Algorithm 1 in the orders to
disconnect the branches in Step 2*.
1) Rand: The branches are disconnected randomly.
2) PFW: The branches are disconnected from the largest
power-ﬂow value to the smallest power-ﬂow value. It
is the deterministic form of the power-ﬂow weighted
method proposed in [25].
3) LODF: The branches are disconnected by the value of yP
described in (2)–(6), from the largest value to the smallest
value. The LODF-based method and its derivatives are
widely used to search the cascading failures [10], [13].
4) GCN: Algorithm 1 proposed in this work.
We present the number of detected cascading failure paths
that incurs load shedding in Fig. 5 . After exhaustive search,
there are 22 cascading failure paths that incur load shedding.
The longest path has seven branch failures. The proposed GCN
method can detect all the paths after only 50 search attempts,
while method LODF, PFW, and Rand detect all the paths after
1101, 1485, and 1477 search attempts, respectively. Hence, the
proposed GCN method has clearly higher search efﬁciency than
all other compared methods.
We then show the interpretability of the model by the proposed
LRP method, which presents the relevance scores of the inputs to
a certain output. The relevance scores are the contribution factors
of the inputs to the load shedding events. We use “L” for branch
and “B” for bus. From the above 22 cascading failure paths, we
analyze the case with initial failures L10→L5. That is, we show
the relevance scores to the 5th output of vector yGCN, under
the power system states where L10 is already disconnected, as
is depicted in Fig. 6. A direct physical explanation of the load
Authorized licensed use limited to: Xian Jiaotong University. Downloaded on May 08,2026 at 08:58:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 7 =====
1310 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONTROL OF NETWORK SYSTEMS, VOL. 8, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2021
Fig. 5. Number of detected cascading failure paths that incurs load
shedding as a function of search attempts: the case of IEEE RTS-79
test system.
Fig. 6. Relevance scores for each inputs of the GCN model that trig-
gers the load shedding for the initial failures L10 →L5. (a) Bar graph. (b)
T opological graph that represents a part of the IEEE RTS-79 system.
shedding is that the disconnection of L10 and L5 will result in the
islanding and load shedding of B6. The relevance scores inFig. 6
can well explain the above inference. The load shedding in this
case mainly results from the initial failure of L10 (the topology
of L10), the increasing load of B6 (the load corresponding to
L5 and L10), and the increasing branch ﬂow from B2 to B6
(the branch ﬂow of L5). Note that some factors are not directly
related to the load shedding, but they are related to the factors
that directly cause the load shedding. For example, the protection
of L5 is not directly related to the load shedding of B6, but the
increase of the branch ﬂow / protection threshold ratio is closely
related with the branch ﬂow of L5. We cannot simply remove
Fig. 7. Relevance scores for each inputs of the GCN model that trig-
gers the load shedding for the initial failures L27 →L2. The topology is
only a part of the IEEE RTS-79 system.
the protection vector xp from the inputs, because it will serve as
an independent determinant as will be shown in the next case.
The above interpretation results can be directly inferred from
the topology of the system. To further demonstrate the in-
terpretability of the LRP algorithm, we analyze a cascading
failures case that is less apparent. The relevance scores to the
2nd output of vector yGCN, under the power system states that
L27 is already disconnected (L27 →L2), is depicted in Fig. 7 .
The disconnection of L27 and L2 will not trigger any islanding
conditions, but the load in B3 relies only on the transmission
line of L6. The branch ﬂow of L6 will exceed the maximum
value. Subsequently, the re-dispatching process will decrease
the branch ﬂow of L6 and causes the load shedding of B3. The
relevance scores in Fig. 7 can also well explain this process. The
load shedding in this case mainly results from the initial failure
of L27 (the topology of L27), the increasing load of B3 (the
load corresponding to L7), and the branch ﬂow limits of L6 (the
protection of L6). The above cases show that the major contribu-
tion factors of the prediction results correspond to the physical
inference of the cascading failures. The interpretation method
can explore some less obvious factors (e.g., the protection of L6
in Fig. 7 ) that incurs the load shedding. Still, the contribution
factors also includes some indirect factors (e.g., the protection
of L5 in Fig. 6), which suggests that operators should be more
careful or should update the model when the operation pattern
changes.
B. Power System of Henan Province
The power system of Henan province considered in this work
is a 500–220 kV power system. After external network equiva-
lence, the power system contains 730 buses and 1571 branches.
To consider a more severe circumstance, we enlarge the actual
load proﬁles of Henan province by a factor of 1.1, and we reduce
all the maximum branch ﬂow thresholds by a factor of 0.8. Since
the load shedding events are more rare in the Henan province
case, we increase the ratio of training weight to w1/w2 = 800.
50 000 scenarios are generated as the training dataset to model
different load proﬁles and different initial contingencies. The
model is trained with 40 epochs and a batch size of 256. All
other experiment settings, including the cascading failures data
Authorized licensed use limited to: Xian Jiaotong University. Downloaded on May 08,2026 at 08:58:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 8 =====
LIU et al.: SEARCHING FOR CRITICAL POWER SYSTEM CASCADING FAILURES 1311
Fig. 8. Number of detected cascading failure paths that incurs load
shedding as a function of (a) search attempts and (b) computation time.
generation and the model training processes, are the same with
the IEEE RTS-79 test system. We ﬁrst use the power system of
Henan province to test the prediction accuracy of the proposed
GCN model, compared to the DNN and CNN model men-
tioned above. We generate 10 000 new scenarios as the testing
dataset. The DNN, CNN, and the GCN models are trained and
tested under the same training and testing datasets, respectively.
The DNN model has three fully connected layers with 4 ˜L,
L, and L output neurons, respectively. The CNN model has
two convolutional layers with one fully connected layer. The
kernel size of the two convolutional layers are 3× 3× 16 and
3× 3× 4, respectively. All of the models implement the Relu
activation function. Since the number of samples from different
classes is unbalanced, a high total prediction accuracy may not
be conducive to an efﬁcient search of cascading failures. We
therefore implement different indexes to evaluate the prediction
result. We ﬁrst introduce the confusion matrix in Table II.
Several indexes are introduced as follows: [44]
1) total accuracy: (a +d)/(a +b +c +d);
2) hit rate: d/(b +d);
3) cover rate: d/(c +d).
The calculated values of the above indexes of DNN, CNN,
and GCN model are listed in Table III. Note that the prediction
T ABLE II
CONFUSION MAT R I X
T ABLE III
COMP ARISON OF DNN, CNN, AND GCN MODELS
of the load shedding events is not the ﬁnal result, but acts as
a guidance for the search for cascading failures that will be
implemented by physical models, as shown in Algorithm 1.
The total accuracy reﬂects the prediction results of both the
cases with and without load shedding. In practice, however,
the prediction of load shedding events is more related to the
search efﬁciency of cascading failures. The hit rate measures
how well the predicted load shedding events hit the actual load
shedding. The cover rate is the ratio of predicted load shedding
events to all the load shedding events. A small hit rate will result
in useless search attempts, while a small cover rate will miss
some cascading failure events so that many additional search
attempts are required to compensate for the missing events. From
Table III, the proposed GCN model has the best performance not
only in the total accuracy, but also in terms of the hit rate and
the cover rate.
Next, we present the search efﬁciency on a set of new load
proﬁles of the power system of Henan province. The search
performance of method Rand, PFW, LODF, and GCN are shown
in Fig. 8. We demonstrate the detected cascading failure paths
as a function of both search attempts and computation time.
An exhaustive search identiﬁes 86 cascading failure paths that
incur load shedding. The longest path has 23 branch failures.
The proposed GCN method can detect all the paths after 2160
search attempts or 1040 seconds, while methods LODF and PFW
detect all the paths after 34 822 and 38 608 search attempts,
or 19 850 and 22 031 seconds, respectively. Method Rand can
only ﬁnd a small proportion of all the paths in the given search
attempts. The LODF and the PFW method have a high search
efﬁciency at the ﬁrst few search attempts, but require a high
number of search attempts to detect the remaining cascading
failure paths that incur load shedding. This is because some of
the load shedding events can be easily detected by the physical
rules (e.g., the islanding conditions), while the rest of the events
are complex and cannot be detected by explicit physical rules.
The above results indicate that the proposed GCN based method
has a high efﬁciency in searching for the load shedding events
caused by cascading failures. It can accelerate the search of all
the critical cascading failure paths from more than ﬁve hours to
around 30 minutes.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Xian Jiaotong University. Downloaded on May 08,2026 at 08:58:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 9 =====
1312 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONTROL OF NETWORK SYSTEMS, VOL. 8, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2021
V. C ONCLUSION
Our work provides a GCN-based approach to conduct online
search for the power system cascading failures with high efﬁ-
ciency. The proposed method links the power network topology
with the structure of neural networks and therefore yields a
smaller parameter space to predict the load shedding events
caused by cascading failures. We also provide an LRP algo-
rithm to uncover the reasons for predicting the cascading failure
events. Case studies on the IEEE RTS-79 test system and on
China’s Henan province power system validate the superiority of
the method. 1) The GCN model has a better prediction accuracy
than benchmark neural network models. 2) The GCN-based
cascading search method has a higher efﬁciency in detecting
the load shedding events caused by cascading failures. 3) The
prediction results of the GCN model are interpretable, enabling
the user to check the logic of the model and uncover the factors
that cause the cascading failures. Overall, the proposed method
enables an efﬁcient and interpretable online cascading failure
search that can contribute to a reliable operation of power
systems.
REFERENCES
[1] M. V aiman et al., “Risk assessment of cascading outages: Methodologies
and challenges,” IEEE Trans. Power Syst. , vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 631–641,
May 2012.
[2] D. Bienstock, Electrical Transmission System Cascades and Vulnerability:
An Operations Research Viewpoint, vol. 22. Philadelphia, PA, USA:
SIAM, 2015.
[3] H. Haes Alhelou, M. E. Hamedani-Golshan, T. C. Njenda, and P . Siano,
“A survey on power system blackout and cascading events: Research
motivations and challenges,” Energies, vol. 12, no. 4, 2019, Art. no. 682.
[4] M. H. Athari and Z. Wang, “Impacts of wind power uncertainty on grid
vulnerability to cascading overload failures,”IEEE Trans. Sustain. Energy,
vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 128–137, Jan. 2018.
[5] Q. Chen and L. Mili, “Composite power system vulnerability evaluation
to cascading failures using importance sampling and antithetic variates,”
IEEE Trans. Power Syst., vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 2321–2330, Aug. 2013.
[6] P . Henneaux and P .-E. Labeau, “Improving monte carlo simulation efﬁ-
ciency of level-I blackout probabilistic risk assessment,” inProc. Int. Conf.
Probabilistic Methods Appl. Power Syst., 2014, pp. 1–6.
[7] J. Kim, J. A. Bucklew, and I. Dobson, “Splitting method for speedy
simulation of cascading blackouts,” IEEE Trans. Power Syst. , vol. 28,
no. 3, pp. 3010–3017, Aug. 2013.
[8] S.-P. Wang, A. Chen, C.-W. Liu, C.-H. Chen, J. Shortle, and J.-Y. Wu,
“Efﬁcient splitting simulation for blackout analysis,” IEEE Trans. Power
Syst., vol. 30, no. 4, pp. 1775–1783, Jul. 2015.
[9] M. J. Eppstein and P . D. Hines, “A “random chemistry” algorithm for iden-
tifying collections of multiple contingencies that initiate cascading fail-
ure,” IEEE Trans. Power Syst., vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 1698–1705, Aug. 2012.
[10] R. Y ao et al. , “Risk assessment of multi-timescale cascading outages
based on Markovian tree search,” IEEE Trans. Power Syst., vol. 32, no. 4,
pp. 2887–2900, Jul. 2017.
[11] Y . Liu, Y . Wang, P . Y ong, N. Zhang, C. Kang, and D. Lu, “Fast power sys-
tem cascading failure path searching with high wind power penetration,”
IEEE Trans. Sustain. Energy, vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 2274–2283, Oct. 2020.
[12] S. Soltan, D. Mazauric, and G. Zussman, “Analysis of failures in power
grids,” IEEE Control Netw. Syst., vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 288–300, Jun. 2017.
[13] S. Soltan, A. Loh, and G. Zussman, “Analyzing and quantifying the effect
of k-line failures in power grids,” IEEE Control Netw. Syst., vol. 5, no. 3,
pp. 1424–1433, Sep. 2018.
[14] A. Dwivedi and X. Y u, “A maximum-ﬂow-based complex network ap-
proach for power system vulnerability analysis,”IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform.,
vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 81–88, Feb. 2013.
[15] X. Wei, S. Gao, T. Huang, E. Bompard, R. Pi, and T. Wang, “Com-
plex network-based cascading faults graph for the analysis of transmis-
sion network vulnerability,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform. , vol. 15, no. 3,
pp. 1265–1276, Mar. 2019.
[16] P . D. Hines, I. Dobson, and P . Rezaei, “Cascading power outages propagate
locally in an inﬂuence graph that is not the actual grid topology,” IEEE
Trans. Power Syst., vol. 32, no. 2, pp. 958–967, Mar. 2017.
[17] K. Zhou, I. Dobson, Z. Wang, A. Roitershtein, and A. P . Ghosh, “A
Markovian inﬂuence graph formed from utility line outage data to mitigate
large cascades,” IEEE Trans. Power Syst., vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 3224–3235,
Jul. 2020.
[18] J. Qi, K. Sun, and S. Mei, “An interaction model for simulation and
mitigation of cascading failures,” IEEE Trans. Power Syst., vol. 30, no. 2,
pp. 804–819, Mar. 2015.
[19] W. Ju, J. Qi, and K. Sun, “Simulation and analysis of cascading failures on
an npcc power system test bed,” in Proc. IEEE Power Energy Soc., 2015,
pp. 1–5.
[20] F. Li and Y . Du, “From Alphago to power system AI: What engineers can
learn from solving the most complex board game,” IEEE Power Energy
Mag., vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 76–84, Mar./Apr. 2018.
[21] Y . Du, F. F. Li, J. Li, and T. Zheng, “Achieving 100x acceleration for n-1
contingency screening with uncertain scenarios using deep convolutional
neural network,” IEEE Trans. Power Syst., vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 3303–3305,
Jul. 2019.
[22] J.-M. H. Arteaga, F. Hancharou, F. Thams, and S. Chatzivasileiadis,
“Deep learning for power system security assessment,” inProc. 13th IEEE
PowerTech, 2019, pp. 1–6.
[23] Y . Jia, Z. Xu, L. L. Lai, and K. P . Wong, “Risk-based power system security
analysis considering cascading outages,”IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform., vol. 12,
no. 2, pp. 872–882, Apr. 2016.
[24] J. Y an, H. He, X. Zhong, and Y . Tang, “Q-learning-based vulnerability
analysis of smart grid against sequential topology attacks,” IEEE Trans.
Inf. F orensics Secur ., vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 200–210, Jan. 2017.
[25] Z. Zhang, S. Huang, Y . Chen, S. Mei, R. Y ao, and K. Sun, “An online
search method for representative risky fault chains based on reinforcement
learning and knowledge transfer,” IEEE Trans. Power Syst., vol. 35, no. 3,
pp. 1856–1867, May 2020.
[26] J. Cremer, I. Konstantelos, and G. Strbac, “From optimization-based
machine learning to interpretable security rules for operation,”IEEE Trans.
Power Syst., vol. 34, no. 5, pp. 3826–3836, Sep. 2019.
[27] Z. Wu, S. Pan, F. Chen, G. Long, C. Zhang, and P . S. Y u, “A comprehensive
survey on graph neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst.,
2020.
[28] J. Du, S. Zhang, G. Wu, J. M. Moura, and S. Kar, “Topology adaptive
graph convolutional networks,” 2017, arXiv:1710.10370.
[29] F. Baldassarre and H. Azizpour, “Explainability techniques for graph
convolutional networks,” 2019, arXiv:1905.13686.
[30] P . Rezaei, P . D. Hines, and M. J. Eppstein, “Estimating cascading failure
risk with random chemistry,” IEEE Trans. Power Syst. , vol. 30, no. 5,
pp. 2726–2735, Sep. 2015.
[31] I. Dobson, B. Carreras, V . Lynch, and D. Newman, “An initial model
for complex dynamics in electric power system blackouts,” in Proc. 34th
Annu. Hawaii Int. Conf. Syst. Sci. , 2001, pp. 2017–2017.
[32] B. A. Carreras, V . E. Lynch, I. Dobson, and D. E. Newman, “Complex
dynamics of blackouts in power transmission systems,” Chaos: Interdis-
ciplinary J. Nonlinear Sci. , vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 643–652, 2004.
[33] H. Ren, I. Dobson, and B. A. Carreras, “Long-term effect of the n-
1 criterion on cascading line outages in an evolving power transmis-
sion grid,” IEEE Trans. Power Syst. , vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 1217–1225,
Aug. 2008.
[34] S. Mei, F. He, X. Zhang, S. Wu, and G. Wang, “An improved OPA model
and blackout risk assessment,” IEEE Trans. Power Syst. , vol. 24, no. 2,
pp. 814–823, May 2009.
[35] T. Guler, G. Gross, and M. Liu, “Generalized line outage distribution
factors,” IEEE Trans. Power Syst., vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 879–881, May 2007.
[36] D. A. Tejada-Arango, P . Sánchez-Martın, and A. Ramos, “Security con-
strained unit commitment using line outage distribution factors,” IEEE
Trans. Power Syst., vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 329–337, Jan. 2018.
[37] S. Bach, A. Binder, G. Montavon, F. Klauschen, K.-R. Müller, and W.
Samek, “On pixel-wise explanations for non-linear classiﬁer decisions by
layer-wise relevance propagation,”PLoS One, vol. 10, no. 7, 2015, Art. no.
e0130140.
[38] Probability Methods Subcommittee, “IEEE reliability test system,” IEEE
Trans. Power App. Syst., vol. PAS-98, no. 6, pp. 2047–2054, Nov. 1979.
[39] T. S. Manuals, “Cplex document,” 2019. [Online]. Available: https://www.
ibm.com/products/ilog-cplex-optimization-studio.
[40] R. D. Zimmerman, C. E. Murillo-Sánchez, and R. J. Thomas, “Matpower:
Steady-state operations, planning, and analysis tools for power systems
research and education,”IEEE Trans. Power Syst., vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 12–19,
Feb. 2011.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Xian Jiaotong University. Downloaded on May 08,2026 at 08:58:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 10 =====
LIU et al.: SEARCHING FOR CRITICAL POWER SYSTEM CASCADING FAILURES 1313
[41] A. Paszke et al. , “Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance
deep learning library,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. , 2019,
pp. 8024–8035.
[42] G. J. McLachlan, K.-A. Do, and C. Ambroise, Analyzing Microarray Gene
Expression Data, vol. 422. Hoboken, NJ, USA: Wiley, 2005.
[43] D. P . Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,”
2014, arXiv:1412.6980.
[44] D. M. Powers, “Evaluation: From precision, recall and F-measure to ROC,
informedness, markedness and correlation,” 2011, arXiv:2010.16061.
Y uxiao Liu (Student Member, IEEE) received
the B.S. degree in 2016 from Electrical Engi-
neering Department, Tsinghua University , Bei-
jing, China, where he is currently working to-
ward the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering.
He was also a Visiting Student Researcher
with the Laboratory for Information and Decision
Systems, Massachusetts Institute of T echnol-
ogy , Cambridge, MA, USA. His research inter-
ests include data-driven power grid analysis and
power system cascading failures modeling.
Ning Zhang (Senior Member, IEEE) received
the B.S. and Ph.D. degrees from the Electrical
Engineering Department, Tsinghua University ,
Beijing, China, in 2007 and 2012, respectively .
He is now an Associate Professor with Ts-
inghua University , Beijing. His research interests
include multiple energy systems integration, re-
newable energy , and power system planning
and operation.
Dan Wu (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. de-
gree in electrical engineering and automation
from the Huazhong University of Science and
T echnology , Wuhan, China, in 2012, the M.S.
and Ph.D. degrees from the University of Wis-
consin Madison, Madison, WI, USA, in 2014 and
2017, respectively .
He was a Postdoctoral Associate with
the Mechanical Engineering Department, Mas-
sachusetts Institute of T echnology (MIT), Cam-
bridge, MA, USA, from 2017 to 2018, and now
is a Postdoctoral Associate with the Laboratory for Information and De-
cision Systems, MIT . His research interests include nonlinear dynamics
and optimization, electric power system analysis, natural gas networks,
interdependent complex systems, algebraic and topological methods in
engineering applications.
Audun Botterud (Member, IEEE) received the
M.Sc. degree in industrial engineering and the
Ph.D. degree in electrical power engineering,
both from the Norwegian University of Science
and T echnology , T rondheim, Norway , in 1997
and 2004, respectively .
He is a Principal Research Scientist with the
Laboratory for Information and Decision Sys-
tems, Massachusetts Institute of T echnology ,
Cambridge, MA, USA, and with the Energy
Systems Division, Argonne National Laboratory ,
Lemont, IL, USA. He was previously with SINTEF Energy Research,
T rondheim. His research interests include power systems, electricity
markets, energy economics, grid integration of renewable energy , en-
ergy storage, and stochastic optimization.
Rui Yao (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
B.S. degree (with distinction) and the Ph.D. de-
gree in electrical engineering from Tsinghua
University , Beijing, China, in 2011 and 2016,
respectively .
He was a Postdoctoral Research Associate
with the University of T ennessee, Knoxville, TN,
USA, during 2016–2018. He is currently a Post-
doctoral Appointee with Argonne National Lab-
oratory , Lemont, IL, USA. His research interests
include power system modeling and stability
analysis, resilience modeling and assessment, and high-performance
computational methodologies.
Chongqing Kang (Fellow, IEEE) received the
Ph.D. degree from the Department of Electri-
cal Engineering, Tsinghua University , Beijing,
China, in 1997.
He is currently a Professor with Tsinghua
University . His research interests include power
system planning, power system operation, re-
newable energy , low carbon electricity technol-
ogy , and load forecasting.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Xian Jiaotong University. Downloaded on May 08,2026 at 08:58:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 