

===== PAGE 1 =====
814 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON POWER SYSTEMS, VOL. 24, NO. 2, MA Y 2009
An Improved OPA Model and
Blackout Risk Assessment
Shengwei Mei, Senior Member , IEEE, Fei He, Xuemin Zhang, Shengyu Wu, and Gang Wang
Abstract—The ORNL-PSerc-Alaska (OPA) model is a blackout
model proposed by researchers at Oak Ridge National Labora-
tory (ORNL), Power System Engineering Research Center of
Wisconsin University (PSerc), and Alaska University (Alaska). Al-
though the OPA model is a landmark study, it has two limitations.
First, there is a signiﬁcant difference between simulation and
practice in transmission line outage and update; and second, the
simulation of cascading failure and the probability distribution
of blackout size are in general not accurate enough. Hence, an
improved OPA model is proposed in this paper to address these
limitations. The proposed model contains two layers of iteration.
The inner iteration describes the fast dynamics of the system and
considers the inﬂuence of power ﬂow, dispatching, automation,
relay protection, and so on. The outer iteration describes the slow
overall system evolution and is concerned with the update of the
power grid, operation modes and planning. Such a model can be
applied to practical large-scale systems. Furthermore, based on
the Value at Risk (V aR) and Conditional Value at Risk (CVaR),
two new complementary blackout risk indices are deﬁned, which
reveal critical characteristics of blackouts and are used to evaluate
security levels of power systems. The effectiveness of the improved
OPA model is veriﬁed by the simulations concerning the Northeast
Power Grid of China.
Index T erms—Cascading failure, CVaR, OPA model, VaR.
I. I NTRODUCTION
M
ODERN power systems are becoming highly intercon-
nected. This is especially important in China where fuel
energy resources are located in the western inner land and most
of the generated electricity is consumed in the major cities in the
east coast. Therefore, a nation-wide interconnection has been
promoted by the State Power Grid Company. Despite the eco-
nomic beneﬁts, power system interconnection gives rise to sev-
eral potential problems, e.g., the high probability of cascading
failure. Such problems have drawn special attention after some
large-scale blackouts in recent years. In this context, methods
based on the complex system theory have become promising in
the analysis of power system blackouts [1]–[5].
Several models have been proposed in order to study the
cascading failure, such as CASCADE model [6], Branching
process model [7], Hidden failure model [8]–[10], OPA model
Manuscript received June 27, 2008; revised November 01, 2008. Current ver-
sion published April 22, 2009. This work was supported in part by the Special
Fund of National Basic Research Program of China (No. 2004CB217902) and
National Natural Science Foundation (No. 50525721, No. 50595411). Paper no.
TPWRS-00489-2008.
The authors are with the State Key Laboratory of Power Systems, Department
of Electrical Engineering, Tsinghua University, 100084 Beijing, China (e-mail:
meishengwei@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn).
Color versions of one or more of the ﬁgures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TPWRS.2009.2016521
[11], and the Manchester model [12]. These models capture the
salient features of cascading failures from different angles. The
CASCADE model and the Branching process model focus on
the network characteristics of power systems and as a result are
less concerned about other aspects. The Hidden failure model
is based on the hidden failure theory and simulates cascading
failures after disturbances. The OPA model is built upon the
Self-Organized Criticality (SOC) theory, contains two different
time scale dynamics, i.e., power ﬂow dynamics and power grid
growth dynamics, and reveals the complexity and criticality
of power systems. All the models mentioned above are based
on dc ﬂows, while the Manchester model is based on ac ﬂows.
Similar to the Hidden failure model, the Manchester model is
adopted to simulate the cascading failure, but cannot be used to
simulate power system evolutions.
Among these models, we focus on the OPA model, which is
a novel and powerful tool in studying power system evolution.
Paper [13] implements the OPA model in simple networks with
regular structures and concludes that a power-dependent tail ex-
ists in the probability distribution function (pdf) of the size of
blackouts. Paper [14] discovers two critical points, which were
further studied in [15]. Motivated by the results in [14] and [15],
the authors of [16] carried out the study on the complex dy-
namics of blackouts. By combining the OPA model with the
Manchester model, a new model was proposed in [17] where the
dc power ﬂow in the OPA model was replaced by the ac power
ﬂow as used in the Manchester model. Later the model in [17]
was further developed in [18] to include a voltage stability anal-
ysis function. Although models with ac ﬂows are more accurate
than the OPA model, they are limited to the study of small-scale
systems due to the amount of the calculation involved. In addi-
tion, they cannot deal with the shortcomings of the OPA model,
among which the most salient one is the critical difference be-
tween the simulation and operation in practical systems, such as
the outage and update of transmission lines.
In this paper, an improved OPA model is proposed, which
considers the effect of dispatching, automation, relay protection
and other important elements to make this model more prac-
tical than the OPA model. Meanwhile, it continues to use the dc
power ﬂow. Therefore, the improved OPA model leads to efﬁ-
cient computation and is applicable to large-scale systems. It is
worth mentioning that some steps of this model are inspired by
the Hidden failure model.
The rest of this paper is arranged as follows. First, we present
the improved OPA model. We investigate in detail the inﬂuence
of dispatching, automation, communication, relay protection,
operation modes and planning. A comparison between simula-
tion results of the OPA model and those of the improved OPA
model is also discussed. Second, we introduce two indices, the
0885-8950/$25.00 © 2009 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Xian Jiaotong University. Downloaded on May 11,2026 at 07:16:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 2 =====
MEI et al.: AN IMPROVED OPA MODEL AND BLACKOUT RISK ASSESSMENT 815
V alue at Risk (V aR) and the Conditional V alue at Risk (CV aR),
which describe the blackout risk quantitatively. Then the cas-
cading failure process in the Northeast Power Grid of China
(NPGC) with 570 buses is studied using this improved model.
Also by applying this model to the NPGC, we investigate the re-
lationship between power system parameters and blackout sizes,
estimate the pdf curves, and calculate the V aR and CV aR in-
dices. Finally, conclusions are drawn in Section VII.
II. S
UMMARY OF THE OPA MODEL
It was observed in the OPA model [11] that the slow load
increase tends to reduce the margins of transmission lines and
hence increases the risk of cascading failure and blackouts. On
the other hand, it was assumed that effective operating policies,
timely maintenance and well-designed controls, as responses
to blackouts, may increase the margins of transmission lines.
So the OPA model contains two layers of iterations, the inner
iteration is concerned with the fast dynamics which simulate
the power ﬂow while the outer iteration cares about the slow
dynamics which simulate the growth of power grid such as the
increase of generation and load and the update of transmission
lines.
As is well known, the OPA model is developed by using the
SOC theory. There are two kinds of variables inﬂuencing the
evolution of power systems. One acts slowly and gently, and
the other acts quickly and ﬁercely. When the system under the
inﬂuence of these two kinds of variables evolves into a crit-
ical condition, a very small disturbance could result in an un-
predictable disaster. Scholars have used the OPA model to ﬁnd
out the “critical condition” of power systems. But as discussed
below, two parts of the OPA model are inconsistent with prac-
tical systems, which undermine the credibility of results derived
using the OPA model.
The ﬁrst part lies in the line outage simulation. In the OPA
model, the power ﬂow of every transmission line is bounded by
its limit due to dc OPF algorithm. On the other hand, the lines,
whose power ﬂows exceed a certain proportion of the limits,
are considered overloaded and should be tripped. Such an im-
plementation of tripping lines under limits corresponds to the
unwanted operation of relay protection and rarely happens in
practice.
The second part lies in the update of the transmission line.
Traditional OPA models fail to incorporate the function of plan-
ning department thoroughly. The main idea of those models
[11], [13]–[16] is to increase the transmission capacity of the
lines which are in outage in the inner iteration. In other words,
the line will not be updated until they are tripped. Paper [19]
tried to strengthen the network by increasing the operating mar-
gins of stressed lines according to the current slow dynamics.
In practical systems, however, the transmission lines are up-
dated based on the load forecasting, i.e., the future slow dy-
namics. Therefore, the effect of planning based on load fore-
casting should be considered in the model.
III. I
MPROVED OPA MODEL
A. Introduction of the Improved Model
Aiming to solve the problems in the traditional OPA model
as discussed in the last section, an improved OPA model is pro-
posed in this section. This improved model also has a two-loop
structure. The inner loop is the fast dynamics process, which
simulates power ﬂow and cascading failure. Compared to the
inner iteration of the OPA model, the improved OPA model con-
siders the effects of dispatch, relay protection and automation,
etc., and thus reﬂects the practical systems more faithfully.
The outer one is the slow dynamic process, which simulates
the evolution of the power systems. Compared to the outer itera-
tion of the OPA model, the improved model simulates the inﬂu-
ence of the effects of planning and operation modes. The time
unit of the slow dynamics is usually taken as one day on which
the fast dynamics is activated. The process of the improved OPA
model can be described as follows.
Step 1)
, initialization.
Step 2) The fast dynamics process on day
 . Calculate the
amount of load shedding.
Step 3) The slow dynamics process.
 .I f
 ,
stop the program; otherwise, go to Step 2.
Now we introduce the mathematical description of the model.
Suppose there are
 buses and
 lines. Let
 be the active
power injected at bus
 on day
 , and
 is the
vector of active power injections on day
 .
The generator set and load set are denoted by
 and
 re-
spectively. The maximum power limit for generator
 on day k
is
 , then
(1)
There is no power loss in dc ﬂow model, so the power balance
equation is
(2)
Let
 be the active power ﬂow on line
 on day
 .
is the power ﬂow of
 lines on day
 . The line
ﬂows must satisfy
(3)
where
 models the transmission limit on line
 on day
 .
There is a linear relationship in dc ﬂow model between power
injections and line ﬂows on day
(4)
where the matrix
 represents the network constraints and can
be calculated easily [8], [11].
Generation and load should be regulated to maintain stability.
Notice that, generation re-dispatch is much preferred than load
shedding. So
should be determined by the following opti-
mization problem:
(5)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Xian Jiaotong University. Downloaded on May 11,2026 at 07:16:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 3 =====
816 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON POWER SYSTEMS, VOL. 24, NO. 2, MA Y 2009
where
 is the demand power at bus
 on day
 . Since only
is supplied, the amount of load
 is shed.
 is the
generation cost coefﬁcient for generator
 . The coefﬁcient
 is
the economic loss coefﬁcient for the load
 , and it is always set
as a large number, so that load shedding is much more expensive
than generation redispatch.
B. Flowchart of the Improved OPA Model
The ﬂowchart of the improved OPA model is shown in Fig. 1.
C. Fast Dynamics
Since the Hidden failure model represents the cascading
failure of power systems more accurately than the OPA model,
we can exploit the Hidden failure model in the fast dynamics of
the improved OPA model. The fast dynamics is implemented
in the following steps.
Step 1) Consider day
. The generator capacity, output
of generators and the load are determined by the
slow dynamics (see slow dynamics for details). The
outage probability of every transmission line is set
to be
to simulate accidental faults.
Step 2) Calculate the dc power ﬂow. The grid may be sep-
arated into several islands because of the outage of
some lines. Regulation of generation and load is nec-
essary to eliminate the unbalanced power of some is-
lands. The regulation strategy in this paper is as fol-
lows. If the total generation is greater than the total
load, the output of every generator is decreased pro-
portional to their initial condition in Step 1. If the
total generation is less than the total load, the output
of every generator is increased according to their re-
serve capacities. If the total generation capacity is
less than the total load, load shedding will be imple-
mented in every load node proportional to its load
amount.
Step 3) If there are some lines with ﬂow beyond the limit,
then go to step 4. If not, exit the fast dynamics.
Step 4) Calculate the optimization problem (5). In practice,
dispatching center may be disrupted due to some
contingencies, such as communication interruption
and the breakdown of the EMS. In the improved
OPA model, the failure rate of dispatching centre is
denoted by
, which is the probability that the
optimization program is not calculated. If optimiza-
tion program is not implemented or convergent, go
to Step 5. Otherwise, exit the fast dynamics process.
Step 5) The probability of tripping overloaded lines is set to
(obviously, in this case the probability of failure
to operate relay protection is
 ). The probability
of tripping normal lines is
 , where
the parameter
 is the base probability of unwanted
operation of relay protection,
 is the load
rate of the transmission line, and
 is the
to the power of n. We choose
because the higher the load rate is, the larger the
probability of unwanted operation is. If there are
outage lines, go back to Step 2; if not, exit the fast
dynamics.
Fig. 1. Flowchart of the improved OPA model.
D. Slow Dynamics
The slow dynamics process of the improved OPA model is as
follows.
Step 1) Multiply all loads by a ﬁxed parameter
 which
is the average daily rate of increase in electricity
demand
(6)
where
 is the power demand at Bus
 on day
 .
Step 2) Increase the generator capacity at the same rate as
the power demand
(7)
where
 is the generator capacity at Bus
 on
day
 .
Step 3) According to the power demand and the generator
capacity above, calculate the power ﬂow (that is the
operation mode of the next day), and update the
transmission line which will be overloaded in the
next day. Step 3 simulates the effects of the oper-
ating and the planning. It is implemented in a sub-
program:
Authorized licensed use limited to: Xian Jiaotong University. Downloaded on May 11,2026 at 07:16:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 4 =====
MEI et al.: AN IMPROVED OPA MODEL AND BLACKOUT RISK ASSESSMENT 817
Fig. 2. Pdf of the load shed.
a) Calculate the dc power ﬂow. If there are not any
overloaded lines, go to Step 3e, otherwise go to
Step 3b.
b) Calculate the dc OPF (the same as in OPA
model). Some transmission lines may not be
adequate, and some loads need to be shed. If
loads are shed, go to Step 3c, otherwise, go to
Step 3e.
c) Restore the shed loads. Each generator in-
creases its output proportional to its genera-
tion, so the power could be balanced.
d) Calculate the dc power ﬂow.
e) Rebuild the lines whose
is larger
than
 , the load rate of weak lines. This step
simulates the department of planning. We up-
date the transmission lines following the OPA
model:
(8)
where
 is the rate of increase in transmission
capacity,
 is the impedance of the transmis-
sion line
 on day
 .
E. Advantages of Improved OPA Model Over OPA Model
The OPA model and the improved OPA model are applied
to the NPGC system to compare the effectiveness of these two
models.
The pdf curve of the load shedding amount is shown on a
log-log plot in Fig. 2, where the horizontal axis indicates the
blackout size and the vertical axis is the corresponding pdf. No-
tice that we deﬁne probability distribution function as
(9)
The procedure of calculating pdf is as follows: First, set the
bin width of a continuous variable
 . Then, count the number
of days that the load shedding amount falls into one bin. The
probability is calculated by the corresponding days divided by
the total number of days. Finally, pdf is obtained through the
cumulative probability distribution by (9). To draw a continuous
pdf curve, piecewise cubic Hermite interpolation is used. The
parameters are determined as follows.
1)
Let
 , which is more than ﬁve years.
2) The daily rate of increase in electricity demand
The total load of the NPGC was 18394 MW in July 2005
[20], and 2140 [21] MW in July 2006, so the annual rate of
increase in electricity demand is about 16.45%. Then the
daily rate of increase in electricity demand is
.
3) The probability of accident
There were 178 accidents in NPGC in 2003 [22]. There
are about 700 transmission lines (Here we consider trans-
formers as lines). So the probability of accident is
.
4) The probability of unwanted operation and failure to op-
erate of the relay protection
In practical systems, the probability of unwanted opera-
tions and failures of the relay protection are less than 0.01,
so set
, and
 .
5) Other parameters
Let
 , namely the failure rate of the dispatching
center is assumed to be 5%.
Let
, and this means that the lines will be updated
when its ﬂow exceeds 90% of its transmission capacity.
Let
. This parameter must be larger than
 .
From Fig. 2, one could conclude that the number of blackouts
by the OPA model is much larger than the one by the improved
OPA model. This is because the outage and upgrade criteria of
transmission lines are different. In the former 600 days, there are
22 blackouts in the OPA model while 14 in the improved model,
mainly due to the ﬁrst difference. In the latter 1400 days, there
are 463 blackouts in the OPA model while 56 in the improved
model, mainly due to the second difference.
The improved model is more convincing compared to the
OPA model. This is because in reality, no more than ten black-
outs happen in this grid within one year, which is much closer to
the outcome by the improved model. In addition, the blackout
size distribution of the improved model agrees approximately
with a power law with exponent of about
, and this
value agrees with the statistical analysis of the historical data,
[5].
IV . VAR AND CVAR
The pdf curve is easy to understand, but it cannot be used
to evaluate the blackout risk of the system quantitatively. The
V aR and the CV aR are deﬁned in this paper to overcome this
shortcoming.
A. V aR
In order to evaluate the investment risk, J. P. Morgan com-
pany proposed the V aR when they were developing the Riskmet-
rics System [23]. Now V aR becomes the most popular theory in
the ﬁnancial analysis. The V aR is the abbreviation of V alue-at-
Risk that is developed based on the theory of probability statis-
tics. It indicates the largest loss with the conﬁdence level
in a
certain period. The mathematical deﬁnition of V aR is
(10)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Xian Jiaotong University. Downloaded on May 11,2026 at 07:16:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 5 =====
818 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON POWER SYSTEMS, VOL. 24, NO. 2, MA Y 2009
Fig. 3. V aR.
Fig. 4. Long tail.
where
 is the conﬁdence level,
 is the loss in a certain pe-
riod. Here the
 is computed with the conﬁdence coefﬁ-
cient
 . If the probability density function
 is known, the
V aR could be calculated by
(11)
Combining formulation (9), it is easy to see
(12)
The sketch of V aR is shown in Fig. 3.
In the ﬁgure, y-axis denotes the pdf. The V aR is concerned
with not only the size but also the probability. It is easy to un-
derstand and calculate, and it can be used to evaluate the risk of
different systems. Furthermore, the V aR changes with the con-
ﬁdence level
.
The V aR has two shortcomings. One is that it does not satisfy
the Coherent Axiom [24], [25]; the other is that the tail-loss mea-
surement is not sufﬁcient. It is known that the V aR is a fractile
with a certain conﬁdence coefﬁcient, so it is unable to indicate
the loss beyond the V aR, especially when the pdf has a fat tail or
a long tail (power law). Unfortunately, the long tail is an impor-
tant characteristic of complex systems in critical conditions and
the pdfs of power systems always have long tails as indicated in
Fig. 4.
Fig. 5. Northeast power grid of China (500 kV).
Obviously, the risk of the normal distribution is smaller than
the risk of the power law distribution. But the V aR at the conﬁ-
dence level
 of these two cases are the same.
B. CV aR
Rockafeller and Uryasev proposed the CV aR to deal with the
shortcomings of the V aR [26]. The CV aR is the abbreviation of
the Conditional V alue-at-Risk, and it is also called Mean Excess
Loss, Mean Shortfall, or Tail V aR. It is the conditional mean
with a certain conﬁdence coefﬁcient. The mathematical deﬁni-
tion of the CV aR is
(13)
where
 is the blackout size and
 is probability density func-
tion of the blackout size.
The blackout size
 and
 could be obtained easily based
on the improved OPA model. So the V aR and CV aR can be cal-
culated easily.
Take blackout data from North America during 1996–2002
for example, if
 , then
 MW,
MW. This implies that there is 95%
conﬁdent that a cascading failure would not result in a blackout
size larger than 5840 MW power of lost. The expected value of
blackout size larger than 5840 MW is 385 MW.
V. C
ASCADING FAILURE IN THE IMPROVED OPA MODEL
From the SOC perspective, when a complex system evolves
to a critical condition, the result of disturbances could not be
predicted and any small disturbance may result in an unpre-
dictable disaster. We present the progress of a cascading failure
which begins with a small disturbance simulated by the im-
proved model. Before that, we introduce the NPGC brieﬂy.
The NPGC consists of four parts, which are Heilongjiang
province, Jilin province, Liaoning province and the north of
Inner Mongolia municipality. There are about 500 transmission
Authorized licensed use limited to: Xian Jiaotong University. Downloaded on May 11,2026 at 07:16:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 6 =====
MEI et al.: AN IMPROVED OPA MODEL AND BLACKOUT RISK ASSESSMENT 819
Fig. 6. Northeast power grid of China.
Fig. 7. Stage 0 and Stage 1 of the cascading failure.
lines, more than 300 transformers, 250 substations, and about
200 generators. In our study, we consider 500- and 220-kV
transmission lines and substations which correspond to a
570-bus system. Fig. 5 is the connection diagram of 500-kV
transmission lines and substations.
Fig. 6 is the detailed network connection related to this sim-
ulation with irrelevant parts simply represented by panes.
In this system, most of the hydropower plants are located in
the east, and most of the thermal power plants are located in the
west and Heilongjiang province. The major consumers are in the
middle and south of the Liaoning province. Hence, the power is
transmitted from the west and the east to the middle and from
the north to the south.
The process of a large-scale cascading failure is summarized
in Table I. Figs. 7–10 demonstrate the six stages of the cascading
failure.
Fig. 8. Stage 2 of the cascading failure.
Fig. 9. Stage 3 of the cascading failure.
The triggering event of this large-scale cascading failure was
an outage transformer of L YS in Liaoning province. The outage
of that transformer led to the overload of the neighboring equip-
ments. The dispatching centre didn’t notice these problems, due
to a certain failure rate of dispatching centre, and thus did not
take prompt actions. As a result, all of these equipments are
tripped. This led the system to Stage 2, in which substation DTS
was separated and all the loads connected to it were shed. In
Stage 3, the fault propagates to Jilin province and the system was
split into several islands. The Inner Mongolia municipality was
involved to this cascading failure in Stage 4. In the last stage,
the dispatching centre noticed the situation and responded. After
regulating the generations and actively shedding some loads, the
cascading failure ended.
This cascading failure began with an outage transformer, and
ended with 21.8% loads shed and more than 80 lines (consider
transformers as lines) outage. Though it is a simulated cascading
Authorized licensed use limited to: Xian Jiaotong University. Downloaded on May 11,2026 at 07:16:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 7 =====
820 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON POWER SYSTEMS, VOL. 24, NO. 2, MA Y 2009
TABLE I
OUTAGED LINES AND TRANSFOMERS AND THE LOADS SHED OF EVERY STEP
Fig. 10. Stage 4 and Stage 5 of the cascading failure.
failure and did not happen in NPGC, it is possible to happen in
practical systems as the North America blackout in 2003. Note
that this simulation is similar to the North America blackout to
some extent and is helpful for us to further study the cascading
failure.
From the above instance, we could see that a small distur-
bance could cause an unpredictable disaster. That is, in SOC
theory, the system has come to the criticality point.
Fig. 11. Pdf curve with different /24and /40/49/0/12/41.
VI. I NFLUENCE OF SOME PARAMETERS
In this section, we investigate the inﬂuence of some parame-
ters on the blackout distribution using the V aR and CV aR. The
set of parameters in Section III are called initial parameters for
convenience.
A. Probability of Unwanted Operation and Failure to Operate
of Relay Protection
Three probability distribution curves are shown in Fig. 11.
They are with different parameters.
1) The initial parameters;
Authorized licensed use limited to: Xian Jiaotong University. Downloaded on May 11,2026 at 07:16:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 8 =====
MEI et al.: AN IMPROVED OPA MODEL AND BLACKOUT RISK ASSESSMENT 821
TABLE II
VAR AND THE CVARW ITH DIFFERENT /24AND /40/49/0/12/41
Fig. 12. Pdf curve with different /22.
TABLE III
VAR AND THE CVARW ITH DIFFERENT /22
2) All the other parameters are the same as the initial param-
eters except the probability of unwanted operation of relay
protection
which is 0.01.
3) All the other parameters are the same as the initial param-
eters except the probability of failure to operate of relay
protection
which is 0.01.
Let
 , then the V aR and CV aR are listed in Table II.
Table II shows that if
 and
 become larger, the cas-
cading failure is more serious, and the blackout risk is bigger.
Notice that the model could not simulate the short-circuit fault
after failure to operate relay protection. So the result underesti-
mates the risk of the failure to operate relay protection.
B. Rate of Increase in Transmission Capacity
Fig. 12 shows two curves with different parameters.
1) The initial parameters;
2) All the other parameters are the same as the initial parame-
ters except the rate of increase in transmission capacity
which is 1.05.
Let
 , V aR and CV aR are listed in Table III.
Table III shows that increasing
 could reduce blackouts, es-
pecially large-scale blackouts. Note that the pdf curve agrees
approximately with a power law with
 being 1.005 and that it
obeys exponential distribution when
 is 1.05. The system is not
in critical condition, and it is safer in SOC theory.
TABLE IV
VAR AND THE CVARW ITH DIFFERENT DISTRIBUTION OF THE LOAD
Fig. 13. Pdf curve with different distribution of the load.
After increasing
 to 1.05, the V aR becomes a little larger
and the CV aR becomes smaller. This indicates that, increasing
has no effect on the small-scale blackouts, but could reduce
large-scale ones. This can be explained as follows: the reason of
small-scale fault is the outage of the transmission line, and the
rebuild of the transmission lines has nothing to do with it. The
reason of the large-scale fault is the cascading failure, and the
rebuild of the transmission line is signiﬁcant in mitigating the
risk.
C. Distribution of Loads
The inﬂuence of load distribution is investigated in this sec-
tion. We consider two distribution strategies.
Distribution 1—The real distribution of loads.
Distribution 2—Decrease the load in LiaoNing province, and
increase the load in JiLin province and HeiLongJiang province.
So the active power is balanced on-site, avoiding transmitting
over long distance.
Let
, the V aR and the CV aR are listed in Table IV.
Table IV shows that the number of blackouts and blackout
risk decrease when the active power is balanced on-site. Notice
that the blackout distribution is approximately a power law with
exponent of about
 with load distribution 1, and about
with load distribution 2. From SOC perspective, dis-
tribution 2 is safer than distribution 1 because the smaller the
slope is, the less the probability of large-scale blackouts is.
Interconnected power systems make the different regions sup-
port each other in case faults take place. However, if vast power
is transmitted over long distance, the outage of the tie line is
fatal. Once the power is balanced on-site, the tie-line is light-
loaded and different regions could support each other in contin-
gencies, in which case the system becomes safer.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Xian Jiaotong University. Downloaded on May 11,2026 at 07:16:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 9 =====
822 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON POWER SYSTEMS, VOL. 24, NO. 2, MA Y 2009
Fig. 14. Pdf curve with different /34.
TABLE V
VAR AND THE CVARW ITH DIFFERENT /34
Fig. 15. Pdf curve with different /17.
D. Maximum Load Rate of Weak Line
Fig. 14 shows two curves with different parameters:
i) the initial parameters;
ii) all the other parameters are the same as the initial param-
eters except
 is 0.9.
Let
 , V aR and CV aR are listed in Table V.
The above table shows that the growth in
 could increase
the occurrence of large-scale faults, while the total number of
blackouts doesn’t decrease. This is because if
 becomes larger,
the system will not be upgraded in time, and small-scale black-
outs may develop into large-scale ones. Hence, the department
of planning is important.
E. Failure Rate of Dispatching Centre
Fig. 15 shows two curves with different parameters:
1) the initial parameters;
TABLE VI
VAR AND THE CVARW ITH DIFFERENT /17
2) all the other parameters are the same as the initial parame-
ters except that
 is 0.15.
Let
 , the V aR and the CV aR are listed in Table VI.
Table V shows that the dispatching centre is an important de-
partment, so the department of automation and communication
must provide a reliable environment for dispatchers.
VII. C ONCLUSION
This paper summarizes the advantages and disadvantages
of the existing blackout models. An improved OPA model
is proposed to overcome some disadvantages of the existing
models. The proposed model can be applied to large-scale
systems, and take into consideration the inﬂuence of the effects
of dispatching, automation, communication, relay protection,
operation mode and planning. Furthermore, based on the V aR
and the CV aR, we are able to evaluate blackout risks quanti-
tatively. The V aR and the CV aR are calculated with various
choices of parameters, for which appropriate risk mitigation
measures are investigated. The effectiveness of the improved
OPA model has been veriﬁed by the simulation results of the
NPGC.
We are currently working on the further development of the
proposed model to incorporate more comprehensive descrip-
tions of the modes of important features, e.g., the practical op-
eration of the planning department. While there is still room
to improve the proposed model, the theoretical and simulation
study in this paper has gained new insight into the mechanism
of blackouts in inter-connected large scale power systems.
R
EFERENCES
[1] B. A. Carreras et al., “Evidence for self-organized criticality in a time
series of electric power system blackouts,” in Proc. 34th Annu. Hawaii
Int. Conf. System Sciences , Jan. 2001, pp. 705–709.
[2] B. A. Carreras et al., “Initial evidence for self-organized criticality in
electric power system blackouts,” in Proc. Hawaii Int. Conf. System
Science, Maui, HI, Jan. 4–7, 2000.
[3] B. A. Carreras et al., “Blackout mitigation assessment in power trans-
mission systems,” in Proc. 36th Annu. Hawaii Int. Conf. System Sci-
ences, HI, 2003, pp. 65–74.
[4] J. Chen, J. S. Thorp, and M. Parashar, “Analysis of electric power
system distrurbance data,” in Proc. 34th Annu. Hawaii Int. Conf.
System Sciences, HI, Jan. 2001, pp. 52–58.
[5] W. Xiaofeng et al. , “Failure analysis on China power grid based on
power law,” J. Control Theory Appl. , no. 3, pp. 1–4, 2006.
[6] I. Dobson, B. A. Carreras, and D. E. Newman, “A probabilistic loading-
dependent model of cascading failure and possible implications for
blackouts,” in Proc. 36th Annu. Hawaii Int. Conf. System Sciences, Jan.
2003, pp. 65–74.
[7] I. Dobson, B. A. Carreras, and D. E. Newman, “Branching process
models for the exponetially increasing portions of cascading failure
blackouts,” in Proc. 38th Annu. Hawaii Int. Conf. System Sciences , HI,
Jan. 2005.
[8] J. Chen, J. S. Thorp, and I. Dobson, “Cascading dynamics and miti-
gation assessment in power system disturbances via a hidden failure
model.,” Int. J. Elect. Power Energy Syst. , vol. 27, no. 4, pp. 318–326,
2005.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Xian Jiaotong University. Downloaded on May 11,2026 at 07:16:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 10 =====
MEI et al.: AN IMPROVED OPA MODEL AND BLACKOUT RISK ASSESSMENT 823
[9] S. Tamaronglak, “Analysis of power system disturbances due to relay
hidden failures,” Ph.D. dissertation, Virginia Poly. and State Univ.,
Blacksburg, V A, 1994.
[10] A. G. Phadeke and J. S. Thorp, “Expose hidden failures to prevent cas-
cading outages,” IEEE Comput. Appl. Power , vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 20–23,
1996.
[11] I. Dobson, B. A. Carreras, and V. E. Lynch, “An initial model for com-
plex dynamics in electric power system blackouts,” inProc. 34th Annu.
Hawaii Int. Conf. System Sciences , HI, 2001, pp. 710–718.
[12] D. P. Nedic et al., “Criticality in a cascading failure blackout model,”
in Proc. 15th Power Systems Computation Conf., Liege, Belgium, Aug.
2005.
[13] B. A. Carreras et al., “Modeling blackout dynamics in power transmis-
sion networks with simple structure,” in Proc. 34th Annu. Hawaii Int.
Conf. System Sciences , HI, 2001, pp. 719–727.
[14] B. A. Carreras, V. E. Lynch, D. E. Newman, and I. Dobson, “Dynamics,
criticality and self-organization in a model for blackouts in power trans-
mission systems,” in Proc. 35th Annu. Hawaii Int. Conf. System Sci-
ences, HI, 2002.
[15] B. A. Carreras et al., “Critical points and transition in an electric power
transmission model for cascading failure blackouts,” Chaos, vol. 12,
no. 4, pp. 985–993, 2002.
[16] B. A. Carreras et al., “Complex dynamics of blackouts in power trans-
mission systems,” Chaos, vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 643–652, 2004.
[17] S. Mei et al. , “Blackout model based on OPF and its self-organized
criticality,” in Proc. 25th Chinese Control Conf. , Harbin, China, Aug.
7–11, 2006, pp. 1662–1668.
[18] S. Mei, Y. Ni, G. Wang, and W. Shengyu, “A study of self-organized
criticality of power system under cascading failures based on AC-OPF
with voltage stability margin,” IEEE Trans. Power Syst. , accepted for
publication.
[19] D. E. Newman, B. A. Carreras, V. E. Lynch, and I. Dobson, “The im-
pact of various upgrade strategies on the long-term dynamics and ro-
bustness of the transmission grid,” in Proc. Electricity Transmission in
Deregulated Markets, Conf. at Carnegie Melon University, Pittsburgh,
PA, Dec. 2004.
[20] The Operation Mode of Northeast Power Grid of China in 2006, North-
east China Power Grid Co. Ltd., in Chinese.
[21] The Operation Mode of Northeast Power Grid of China in 2007, North-
east China Power Grid Co. Ltd., in Chinese.
[22] The Operation Mode of Northeast Power Grid of China in 2004, North-
east China Power Grid Co. Ltd., in Chinese.
[23] J. P. Morgan, RiskMetrics—Technical Document. New Y ork,
Reuters, 1996.
[24] P. Artzner et al. , “Thinking coherently,” J. Risk , vol. 10, no. 11, pp.
68–71, 1997.
[25] P. Artzner et al., “Coherent measures of risk,” Math. Fin., vol. 9, no. 3,
pp. 203–228, 1999.
[26] R. T. Rockafellar and S. Uryasev, “Optimization of conditional
value-at-risk,” J. Risk, vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 21–41, 2000.
Shengwei Mei (SM’05) received the B.S. degree
in mathematics from Xinjiang University, Urumqi,
China, the M.S. degree in operations research
from Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, and the
Ph.D. degree in automatic control from the Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing, in 1984, 1989, and
1996, respectively.
He is currently a Professor at Tsinghua University.
His research interests include power system analysis
and control.
Fei He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree at Tsinghua University, Beijing,
China.
His research interests include the analysis and control of power systems.
Xuemin Zhang is an Assistant Professor at Tsinghua University, Beijing,
China. Her research interests include the analysis and control of power systems.
Shengyu Wu is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree at Tsinghua University,
Beijing, China.
His research interests include the analysis and control of power systems.
Gang Wang is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree at Tsinghua University, Bei-
jing, China.
His research interests include the analysis and control of power systems.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Xian Jiaotong University. Downloaded on May 11,2026 at 07:16:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 